**Ecology Specialisation of Masters in Biology**

**Instructions for students and supervisors**



Duration
========

The Masters is composed of three parts:

1\. BIO 510 (The masters thesis). The duration of this part is 12 months.
If work on the thesis is interrupted by work for the other two parts of
the Masters, ensure the an end date of the Masters Thesis that includes
this, and note this on the Learning Agreement in advance.

2\. BIO 520 (Integrated knowledge in biology). This module requires 300
hours of self-study, so has a minimum duration of 2 months (8 hours per
day, five days per week, for seven and a half weeks).

3\. Elective modules (20 CPs). The time used for these is of course
separate from time used for BIO 510 and 520.

<span id="_Toc278616876" class="anchor"><span id="_Toc278616878" class="anchor"></span></span>The learning agreement
====================================================================================================================

The learning agreement sets out the student’s programme of learning and
research during their Masters. It should be well thought out and
carefully planned, such that changes are unecessary. All sections should
be completed before the signature of the Masters Coordinator is sought.

Extensions
==========

Due to fairness, the total duration of a Master's project is one year,
and not more except in exceptional circumstances. The fairness goes in
both directions: students must be treated equally, but the should also
not be overburdened by a project that (perhaps unexpectedly) requires
more work than reasonably fits within one year. If a student has to work
for a living a significant amount of time even during the Master's
project, a delay must also be planned from the start. If a project turns
out to be more extensive than planned, the student must be given the
possibility to finish the thesis within time, and perhaps continue the
project after graduation.

Circumstances that might require and qualify for an extension include:

1\. Illness / injury of student (requires a doctors note).

2\. Family emergencies.

Circumstances that do not qualify for an extension include:

1\. Difficulties with the research (e.g., organisms not growing, more
data than expected, analyses harder than expected, taking longer to
write than expected, machine breakdowns, wanting to do “just one more
experiment”, etc.).

2\. Busy supervisors.

3\. Badly planned learning agreements (e.g., setting a handing in
deadline during holidays, not anticipating important activities).

To request an extension please discuss the request with your supervisor,
and then email it to the Masters Coordinator and cc your supervisor.

**BIO 520 "Integrated Knowledge in Biology**

Description
-----------

This module, designed as a self-study period of the Master degree course
and comprising of a total of 300 study hours (corresponding to about 2
months), allows students to demonstrate a comprehensive understanding of
primarily the area of their chosen MSc specialization but also general
fundamental biological concepts. The supervisor of the Master thesis
discusses and designs the scope and content of the module with each
individual student, with required assistance from the Masters
coordinator. In general, it is expected that the student uses the
opportunity to acquire a broad and solid overview in Ecology (for
instance by working through an actual textbook like Begon, Harper, and
Townsend, Ecology), with additional focus on the general area of their
Masters Thesis research. At the end of the self-study period, the
examination takes place in the form of a three-hour written and a
30-minute oral examination.

Learning Outcomes
-----------------

By the end of this module students should be able to

- demonstrate their understanding and command of relevant biological
facts, methods and concepts

- identify and explain interrelationships between the various facts,
methods and concepts

- summarise and critically review scientific literature efficiently and
effectively

Format of the exams
-------------------

The three-hour written and the oral examination should ideally take
place within one week. While an approximate date is already determined
in the Learning Agreement at the start of the MSc Program, the precise
dates have to be arranged on an individual basis between the thesis
supervisor and the student, and communicated to the MSc coordinator. In
the past, the exam has often been scheduled after completion of the
Master thesis. *However, students may find it more sensible and useful
to perform the study before the Masters thesis research, and to include
in the essay, a thorough review of literature generally relevant to
their Masters thesis (this could work well with option 1.3 for the
written part, see below).* The final grade will be the arithmetic mean
(rounded to half grades) of the grades obtained in the two parts.

Part 1: Written examination
---------------------------

The written examination lasts 3 hours. Unless otherwise agreed, the exam
takes place at the Institute of Evolutoinary Biology and Environmental
Studies (IEU) in a room organized by the MSc coordinator. In that case
the thesis supervisor has to make sure that the exam questions are
transmitted sufficiently ahead of time to the MSc coordinator
(owen.petchey@ieu.uzh.ch, Y34-J-50). Supervision of the exam is then
handled by the MSc coordinator. The candidate can bring written notes,
but not a complete copy of the planned essay. The examiner can (with
advance notice) provide a computer (with no internet access) on which
the essay can be written.

Options for the exam:

1.1 *Essay*

One option is to offer the candidate two to three general topics in the
field of Ecology. She/he selects *one* of these, and writes a short
essay (a few pages) to demonstrate her/his general knowledge in the
field.

Examples of previous essay titles:

-   Describe and critique a general ecological “law”.

-   How are complexity and stability related?

-   What is the functional significance of biodiversity?

-   What factors affect how likely is a species to go extinct?

-   What are the main hypotheses for why there are so many species?

1.2 *Analysis of primary literature*

The candidate will be given three primary literature papers by the
thesis supervisor one week before the date of the written exam, usually
in electronic form (pdf). The candidate has to read and acquire an
understanding of these papers until the exam. At the exam, she/he will
be asked a series of “journal club style” questions about one two, or
all three of these papers. These should be answered completely and
succinctly.

Examples of previously asked primary literature questions. Obviously,
the questions make no sense without the paper, but you get a general
idea…

-   How did the authors justify the experimental design used?

-   If you were the author of this paper, what would be the next
    experiment(s) that you would perform? Explain briefly why, and how
    you would perform these experiments.

-   Explain the principles capture-mark-recapture methods.

-   With reasoning, explain if you think appropriate statistical methods
    were used?

-   What is one of the most significant errors or problems in the paper?

1.3 *Literature review*

A subject area within Ecology is chosen, perhaps an area that includes
the Masters thesis research area, and a literature review is researched
and written. The review could include documentation of previous work,
critique of previous work, and synthesis of the same.

<span id="_Toc278616884" class="anchor"><span id="OLE_LINK1" class="anchor"><span id="OLE_LINK2" class="anchor"></span></span></span>Part 2: Oral examination
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The oral exam should take place in the same week as the essay is
written. The oral exam may follow a presentation of the Master thesis in
a public research seminar followed by a public discussion. The Masters
Coordinator or a delegate therefore must be present, in addition to the
Masters supervisor. The supervisor or the MSc coordinator can also
invite additional group leaders to attend the closed session.

Apart from the candidate and the Master thesis supervisor, the MSc
coordinator as well as perhaps additional group leaders will participate
at the oral exam. It is the responsibility of candidate and Master
thesis supervisor to arrange a date with the other examiners. In
addition, in case the oral exam is preceded by a public seminar
presentation of the Master thesis research by the candidate, it is the
responsibility of candidate and Master thesis supervisor to reserve a
seminar room, organize the seminar and inform the other examiners where
the seminar will take place. In special cases, the oral exam can be
organized by the MSc coordinator.

BIO520 FAQs
-----------

*1. Who selects which option (general essay, literature review, study of
particular papers)?\
*The student and supervisor, with any require input from the masters
coordinator.

*1. Who selects the publications (if this option is taken)?*

The supervisor, with any require input from the masters coordinator.

*3. How close to the topic of the Master thesis should the selected
papers be?\
*The papers should address matters of the chosen MSc specialization
(i.e. Ecology). They should not be too close to the area of the Master
thesis research but they can be from the *wider* area of the Master
thesis research.

*3. Who hands out the pdfs of the selected publications to the
candidate? When are they handed out?\
*The Master thesis supervisor. Exactly one week ahead of the date of the
written exam by e-mail to the candidate with a cc to the MSc
coordinator.

*4. Who formulates the specific questions concerning the selected
publications for the written exam?* Specific questions are formulated
concerning one, two or all three of the selected publications by the
Master thesis supervisor, but it is not excluded that they are
contributed by the MSc coordinator. The Master thesis supervisor
presents his/her suggestions for these specific questions to the MSc
coordinator ahead of the exam.

*5. Who formulates the essay topics? *

The Master thesis supervisor and student propose essay topics to the MSc
coordinator. Note that these topics have to be rather general. They
should not be too closely related to the Master thesis research project,
but can include it.

*6. Who is responsible that a definitive selection of questions and
essay topics is available at the date* *of the written exam?\
*The Master thesis supervisor.

*7. Who organizes the room for the written exam and the supervision of
the candidate during the written exam?*

In general, this will be the MSc coordinator. He must therefore be
brought in possession of the definitive questions and essay topics at
least a week before the written exam.

*8. Who corrects and grades the written exam?\
*The Master thesis supervisor. She/he will get the original solutions
written by the candidate from the MSc coordinator and is expected to
communicate the corrected exam as well as a suggestion for an
appropriate grade to the MSc coordinator within about a week. The MSc
coordinator has the right to modify the suggested grade.

BIO 510 Master Thesis
=====================

The written Master thesis has to comply formally with the usual
standards applied to scientific publications. The student has to hand in
the final version of his Master thesis to the Studienkoordination on the
date fixed in the Learning Agreement. Additional copies will have to be
given to the Master thesis supervisor and to the MSc coordinator for
evaluation. The supervisor should forward his evaluation report together
with a suggestion for an appropriate grade for BIO 510 (full and half
grades permitted) to the MSc coordinator. The coordinator has the right
to ask for revisions of Master theses that do not fulfil formal
standards, as well as modify the suggested grade.

The oral and written part must each be graded at least 4.0 to pass.
Retaking individual components (i.e., oral or written) is possible.

Thesis grading instructions
---------------------------

In general the following six criteria (A.1-3, B.1-3) are most important
for grading BIO 510:

A. Thesis: Overall style, presentation, logic, language, completeness

A.1 Introduction:

- Concise overview of the research field relevant to the Master thesis
focussed towards an explanation of the significance of the Master thesis
research within this field

- Clear description of the problem addressed in the thesis, and clear
statement of the project goals

A.2 Results and Methods:

- Clear description of the logic and hypotheses underlying the choice of
performed experiments

- Clear presentation and correct interpretation of the experimental
results

- Clear description of the methods used such that all experiments can be
reproduced by others

A.3 Discussion and Conclusions:

- Concise discussion of the obtained results with respect to the
original goals

- Discussion of the results into a more general context within the
research field

- Formulation of new hypotheses, outlook for future work

Note that the supervisor should base his grade recommendation on a
version of the Master thesis that has not yet been corrected by the
supervisor or (other experienced scientists) and that is considered to
be the final version by the student. Upon request, the MSc coordinator
is entitled to inspect this first final version. However, subsequent
revision in response to comments by the supervisor (or experienced
scientists) is permitted and in fact an important element of learning
and teaching of the MSc program.

B. Practical work in the laboratory: Overall attitude, motivation,
input, independence

B.1 Lab work:

- High quality and conclusiveness of experimental work

- Independent organization of experimental procedures

- Solid understanding of the theory behind experimental techniques

- Detailed and traceable documentation of the experimental work in the
lab note book

B.2 Experimental design:

- Independent interpretation and design of experiments

- Understanding of the purpose, possibilities and limitations of the
applied experimental techniques

B.3 Communication:

- Communicative attitude in the laboratory

- Ability to ask for and make constructive use of advice

- Initiation of and contribution to scientific discussions

- Clear presentation of the project and the results in group meetings
and during a contingent Master thesis defence.

2.1 *Public research seminar on Master thesis project*

**The public research seminar** (about 25 minutes + 10 minutes of public
discussion). Quality of the performance will be considered (among many
additional points) when deciding on a grade for the Master thesis (BIO
510). The public research seminar is used as a convenient mechanism for
the student to present his/her thesis work to the examiners. After the
research seminar and the short public question/answer period, all guests
are asked to leave the room. The final research seminar is followed by a
maximum 30-minute question/answer session, in which the student’s
supervisor and the MSc coordinator (or a delegate thereof) ask the
student questions related to the Master thesis, to the field of
specialization (i.e. Ecology) and to fundamental general biological
concepts.

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Universität Zürich                                      
                                                          
  Studienkoordination                                     
                                                          
  Fachbereich Biologie                                    
                                                          
  Winterthurerstrasse 190                                 
                                                          
  8057 Zürich                                             
                                                          
  ------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                          <span id="Text30" class="anchor"></span>Prof. Dr. Vorname Name
                                                          
                                                          <span id="Text35" class="anchor"></span>Funktion
                                                          
                                                          <span id="Text36" class="anchor"></span>Telefon +00 00 000 00 00
                                                          
                                                          <span id="Text39" class="anchor"></span>Telefax +00 00 000 00 00
                                                          
                                                          <span id="Text38" class="anchor"></span>vorname.name@uzh.ch
                                                          

  Zürich, <span id="Text31" class="anchor"></span>Datum

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Masterabschluss in Vertiefungsrichtung
======================================

<span id="Text17" class="anchor"></span>Vorname, Name, <span id="Text27"
class="anchor"></span>Matrikelnummer

Mit der Vorlage <span id="Text18" class="anchor"></span>ihrer/seiner
Masterarbeit mit dem Titel „<span id="Text20"
class="anchor"></span>Titel“ (<span id="Text26"
class="anchor"></span>Betreuer/in: Prof./Dr.) und der Absolvierung der
schriftlichen und mündlichen Prüfungen, hat Frau/Herr Name die von mir
betreuten Teile ihres/seines Masterstudiums <span id="Text25"
class="anchor"></span>erfolgreich/ohne Erfolg abgeschlossen. Sie/Er
erhielt die folgenden Noten:

  Masterarbeit: BIO 5<span id="Text34" class="anchor"></span>      Note\*:      
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------- ------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------
  Themenübergreifende Fachkompetenz:

> \*ganze oder halbe Note

Sofern die übrigen Voraussetzungen ebenfalls erfüllt sind, kann <span
id="Text13" class="anchor"></span>Frau/Herr Name aus

meiner Sicht der Mastergrad verliehen werden.

Masterkoordinator/Masterkoordinatorin Leiter/Leiterin der Masterarbeit
und/oder

Prüfungsleiter

<span id="Text23" class="anchor"></span>Prof./Dr. <span id="Text22"
class="anchor"></span>Prof./Dr.
